---
path: '/chapter-6/1-what-is-fairness'
title: 'What is fairness'
hidden: false
---

Let´s imagine that due to the COVID-19 pandemic in Finland all matricular examinations (in secondary schools) to be held in autumn 2020 were cancelled. As a result, an alternative method had to be designed and implemented to determine the qualification grades to be given to students for that year. Students will be accepted for university studies on the basis of their grades, so the grades are really important.

The government decided that the teachers give an estimate of how they thought their students would have performed on the exams, and that will determine the grades. Teachers were asked to make evaluations of their pupils and the results were then put through the algorithm. This was apparently done because teachers are often likely to be more generous in assigning an estimated mark, which could lead to grade inflation and also give unfair advantage to some students.

To combat the grade inflation, an algorithm that weighted the scores based on the historic performance of individual secondary schools was used.  The idea was that the algorithm would compensate for the tendency of teachers to inflate the expected performance of their students, and thus the estimations would more accurately predict how test-takers would have actually performed. The  algorithm was designed to rely on two pieces of information: the ranking of students within a school and their school’s historical performance.

As a result the grades corresponded, on a national level, the grade distribution in previous years. However, the algorithm downgraded of nearly 40 per cent of the grades predicted by teachers. Moreover, it was poorer students who were impacted the most. Data showed that the results of those from lower socio-economic backgrounds were downgraded more often. That is, for low-income students who were hoping to head to university, the results were more devastating.

This is an example of the unfairness of testing algorithm, but also an example of how algorithms can reinforce the already existing economic and societal bias. Although in countries such as in Finland, the state provides equal opportunities for all, also in Finland students with higher socio-economic background are more likely to get an university degree than their peers with lower socio-economic backgrounds.

Fairness and bias are probably the most discussed ethical issues related to the contemporary algorithms. Why are they so central? First, fairness is a fundamental element of social stability. As the philosopher John Rawls remarks, the stability of a society—or any group —depends upon the extent to which the members of that society feel that they are being treated justly. When some of society's members feel that they are treated in an unfair manner, it usually creates a foundation for social unrest, disturbances, and strife. People hold social unity only to the extent that their institutions are fair. Second, as Immanuel Kant remarked, human beings have the same dignity. In virtue of this dignity they are entitled to be treated as equals. If individuals are treated unfairly - especially on arbitrary grounds - their fundamental human dignity is violated. When this violation is implemented in practices, it leads to discrimination.

However, as the example of grade inflation algorithm illustrates, fairness is a complex issue. The algorithm was designed to correct the inflation, because it was thought it would be unfair, if those students who can´t take the exams will get unfair advantage. However, at the same time the algorithm was not only unfair, but also reinforced the already existing deeper societal problems.  So, what is fairness, in the first place? Should fairness consist of ensuring everyone has an equal probability of obtaining some benefit? Or, should fairness take the individual differences into account, and recognise the diversity? And, are fairness and discrimination synonymous, or do they mean separate things?
